# Chapter 4 - Comments

---

## Key Takeaways

- The best comment is the one you avoided
- Code should explain itself
- Comments are only really acceptable for legal purposes or complex code that can't be changed to be easier to read.
- Don't comment bad code to explain it, fix it.
- Comments tend to pollute and congest code bases and even often mislead the reader rather than help the readability of code.
- Hard to maintain as code evolves, as what you're describing what necessarily stay the same.

## Comments Do Not Make Up for Bad Code

- Rather than spend time commenting the code that is a mess, spend that time cleaning the mess.

## Explain Yourself in Code

- Explained in previous chapters, we should be using good code readability practices to ensure that code reads well and explains itself.
  - I believe that SRP principle helps achieve this significantly as demonstrated in the example.

## Good Comments

- Legal comments like authorship or copyright statements are necessary in code bases sometimes.
- Informative comments like explaining what an abstract method returns, however it is preferable to have the function name describe this.
- Explanation of intent comments like an author taking an interesting approach to a problem, you may not agree with the approach but at least you know what he is trying to do.
- Clarification comments like translating the meaning of an obscure argument or return value. Although we should try to make this clear through code, we don't have much of a say if what we are using is not our code, so clarifying comments may be useful here.
  - Must ensure that our clarifying comments are in fact correct!
- Warnings, it can be useful to warn users of potential risks of using a function or something of the sort.
- TODO comments can be useful for notifying readers that a function is "in the works" or of a degenerative implementation that needs to be updated.
- Amplification comments can be good to notify a reader that some code that may not seem important actually plays a large role.
- Javadocs are very useful when writing a public API.

## Bad comments

- Mumbling comments are when you put in a comment just because you feel like you should, no real thought has gone into it.
- Redundant comments are when the comment doesn't provide any value, useless reading... the code already describes itself.
- Misleading comments are inaccurate comments or comments with misinformation or lack of information that can lead to incorrect or bad assumptions about the code.
- Mandated comments are comments that are their for the sake of having a comment, like saying "every function needs a comment", this will just clutter the code base.
- Journal comments are to keep track of edits but with version control systems now, these are redundant and not necessary. They're just clutter.
- Noise comments are ones that restate the obvious and provide no valuable information.

## Don't Use a Comment When You Can Use a Function or a Variable

## Position Markers

- Grouping code together with big comments lines like:

```JavaScript
// Actions ///////////////////////////////////
```

- This is clutter and should be avoided, very rarely is this necessary.

## Closing Brace Comments

- Refers to comments at the end of braces to show what that brace belongs to, these are redundant noise.
- We should be trying to shorten our functions instead.

## Attributions and Bylines

- Once again version control is very good at keeping track of who does what.
- Making this attribution comments also redundant.

## Commented-Out Code

- Once again version control systems make it possible to retrieve old code.
- Therefore we mustn't be afraid of losing old code if we end up needing it again.
- If code is commented out and not being used it should be eliminated.

## HTML Comments

- "HTML in source code comments is an ABOMINATION"
- If comments are to be extracted by some tool, it should be the responsibility of that tool and not the programmer.

## Non-local Information

- Comments shouldn't give too much information.
- If there is even a comment it should only provide local information not system or global information.

## Too Much Info

- Don't put historical discussions or irrelevant descriptions in code, it only clutters it.

## Inobvious Connection

- If you are going to write a comment you want it to be obvious what code the comment refers to.

## Function Headers

- Short functions don't need headers, it should describe itself.
- If we construct our functions properly with care, most if not all of our functions should be relatively short.

## Javadocs in Non-public Code

- If code is not intended for public consumption, generating documentation pages is not really useful.
- The extra formality of the javadoc comments amounts to cruft and distraction.

---

[Return](../)
