# Chapter 6 - Objects and Data Structures

---

## Summary

- It's key to distinguish the two concepts and use the one more suited to the task at hand.

### Objects

- Expose behavior and hide data.
- Easy to add new kinds of objects without changing existing behavior.
- Hard to add new behaviors to existing objects.
- If the system requires the flexibility to add new data types, we prefer objects.

### Data Structures

- Expose data and have no specific behaviors.
- Easy to add new behaviors to existing data structures.
- Hard to add new data structures to existing functions.

---

## Data / Object Anti-Symmetry

- Objects hide their data behind abstractions and expose functions that operate on that data.
- Data structures expose their data and have no meaningful functions.
- Below are 2 examples showing this juxtaposition and to demonstrate that one is not better than the other.

### Procedural Example

- If you add `perimeter()` function to `Geometry`, the shape classes, along with any other dependant classes will be unaffected.
- However if you add a new shape, you must change all the functions in `Geometry` to deal with it.

```Java
public class Square {
    public Point topLeft;
    public double side;
}

public class Rectangle {
    public Point topLeft;
    public double height;
    public double width;
}

public class Circle {
    public Point center;
    public double radius;
}

public class Geometry {
    public final double PI = 3.14;

    public double area(Object shape) throws NoSuchShapeException {
        if (shape instanceof Square) {
            Square s = (Square)shape;
            return s.side * s.side;
        } else if (shape instanceof Rectangle) {
            Rectangle r = (Rectangle)shape;
            return r.height * r.width;
        } else if (shape instanceof Circle) {
            Circle c = (Circle)shape;
            return PI * c.radius * c.radius;
        }
        throw new NoSuchShapeException();
    }
}
```

### OO Example

- Now the `area()` method is polymorphic.
- No Geometry class is needed.
- If I add a new shape, no existing functions are affected.
- If I add a function, all the existing shapes must change.

```Java
public class Square implements Shape {
    private Point topLeft;
    private double side;

    public double area() {
        return side*side;
    }
}

public class Rectangle implements Shape {
    private Point topLeft;
    private double height;
    private double width;

    public double area() {
        return width*height;
    }
}

public class Circle implements Shape {
    private Point center;
    private double radius;
    private final double PI = 3.14;

    public double area() {
        return PI*radius*radius;
    }
}
```

---

## Law of Demeter

- A module should not know about the innards of the objects it manipulates.
- LoD says that a method `f` of a class `C` should only call the methods of these:
  - `C`
  - An object created by `f`
  - An object passed as an argument to `f`
  - An object held in an instance variable of `C`

---

## Train Wrecks

- Chains of calls are often considered sloppy style and should be avoided.

```Java
final String outputDir = ctxt.getOptions().getScratchDir().getAbsolutePath();

// This can be better written as

Options opts = ctxt.getOptions;
File scratchDir = opts.getScratchDir();
final String outputDir = scratchDir.getAbsolutePath();
```

- In terms of LoD; if ctxt, Options and ScratchDir are objects it violates the law due to their internal structure not being hidden.
- If they are data structures, they naturally expose their innards and LoD does not apply.

---

## Hybrids

- Avoid half object half data structure implementations, you get the worst of both worlds.
- Tells the reader that the author has a muddled design.

---

## Hiding Structure

- Going back to the previous example if ctxt, options, and scratchDir are objects with real behavior.
- We can hide its innards by telling to do something rather than asking for its internals.

```Java
BufferedOutputStream bos = ctxt.createScratchFileStream(classFileName);
```

---

## Data Transfer Objects (DTO)

- Is essentially a `class` with no functions and only public variables.
- Very useful for communicating with databases and parsing messages from sockets.
- They often become the first in a series of translation stages that convert raw data in a database into objects in the application code.

---

[Return](../)
