# Chapter 9 - Unit Tests

---

### Three Laws of TDD

**1.** You may not write production code until you have written a failing unit test  
**2**. You may not write more of a unit test than is sufficient to fail, and not compiling is failing  
**3**. You may not write more production code than is sufficient to pass the currently failing test

### Keeping Tests Clean

- It is important in the long term to use good variable names and take care when writing your tests.
- This makes it easier to maintain and debug as code evolves.
- Tests should evolve with the production code.
- Dirty tests are just as bad as no tests, they will frustrate people and slow things down.

### Tests Enable the -ilities

- Unit tests are what keep our code flexible, maintainable,and reusable.
- Without tests changing code can result in unexpected bugs.
- Unit tests alleviate fear of change.

### Clean Tests

- **Readability** is what makes our tests clean.
  - Clarity, Simplicity, and Density of Expression are what makes tests readable.

### Domain-Specific Testing Language

- Rather than using some API that a programmer uses to manipulate the system, we build up a set of functions and utilities that make use of the API.
- Doing this results in the tests being more convenient to write and easier to read.
- These functions and utilities become a specialised API used by the tests.
  - They are a testing language that programmers use to help themselves write their tests and to help those who must read those tests later on.

### Dual Standard

- Testing code does have a different set of engineering standards than production code.
- It must still be simple, succinct, and expressive, but it need not be as efficient as production code.
- We don't deploy our test suite.
- There are things that you might never do in a production environment that are okay in a test environment.
- They tend to involve issues of memory and CPU efficiency but never issues of cleanliness.

### One Assert Per Test

- Every unit test should ideally have one assert statement.
- This basically comes down to each unit test testing one thing, one piece of functionality.
- Links back in to the the Single Responsibility Principle, think of a unit test like a function.

- This ties into **single concept per test**, same thought process as above.

### F.I.R.S.T

- Clean tests follow five other rules as well:
  - `Fast:` Tests should be fast, we won't be encouraged to run tests if they're going to take too long.
  - `Independent`: Test shouldn't depend on each other.
  - `Repeatable`: Tests should be repeatable in any environment.
  - `Self-Validating`: Test should have a boolean output, pass or fail. Otherwise failure can be subjective.
  - `Timely`: Tests need to be written in a timely fashion. They should be written just before production code.

---

[Return](../)
